+++
title = "How predictable is extinction? Forecasting species survival at million-year timescales"
date = 2019-06-23
draft = false

# Talk start and end times.
#   End time can optionally be hidden by prefixing the line with `#`.
time_start = 2019-06-23
time_end = 2019-06-27

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["Peter Smits", "Seth Finnegan"]

# Abstract and optional shortened version.
abstract = ""
abstract_short = ""

# Name of event and optional event URL.
event = "North American Paleontological Convention"
event_url = ""

# Location of event.
location = "Riverside, California"

# Is this a selected talk? (true/false)
selected = false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this talk with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["deep-learning"]` references `content/project/deep-learning.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
projects = ["extinction_risk"]

# Tags (optional).
#   Set `tags = []` for no tags, or use the form `tags = ["A Tag", "Another Tag"]` for one or more tags.
tags = ["academic"]

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_code = ""

# Does the content use math formatting?
math = false

# Does the content use source code highlighting?
highlight = true

# Featured image
# Place your image in the `static/img/` folder and reference its filename below, e.g. `image = "example.jpg"`.
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""

+++
  
A tenant of conservation paleobiology is that knowledge of past extinction patterns can help us to better predict future extinctions. Although the future is unobservable, we can test the strength of this proposition by asking how well models conditioned on past observations would have predicted subsequent extinction events at different points in the geological past. To answer this question we analyze the well-sampled fossil record of Cenozoic planktonic microfossil taxa (foramanifera, radiolarians, diatoms, and calcareous nanoplankton.) For each group we examine how extinction probability varies over time as a function of species age, time of observation, current geographic range, change in geographic range, climate state, and change in climate state. Although the best-performing model includes time-varying effects and historical covariates (change in range and change in climate state) the improvement in predictive power over models with constant effects and no historical covariates is very minor. This model has an approximately 78\% median probability of correctly ranking the relative extinction risk any two randomly selected species. It performs nearly as well at out-of-sample prediction (70-80\%), implying that determinants of extinction risk have varied only modestly through time. An important caveat is that human impacts may substantially disrupt range-risk dynamics so that the future will be less predictable than it has been in the past.
